Cooperative multitasking
Preemptive multitasking

Preemption: the act of involuntarily suspending a running process.
Timeslice of a process: the time the process runs before it is preempted is usually predetermined.

Linux's unique "fair" scheduler does not employ timeslices.

Policy
Policy is the behavior of the scheduler that determines what runs when.

I/O-Bound Versus Processor-Bound Processes
Processes can be classified as either I/O-bound or processor-bound.

An I/O-bound process spends much of its time submitting and waiting on I/O requests. Such a process is runnable for only short durations, because it eventually blocks waiting on more I/O.
"I/O" means any type of blockable resource, such as keyboard input or network I/O, and not just disk I/O. Most graphical user interface (GUI) applications are I/O-bound, even if they never read from or write to the disk, because they spend most of their time waiting on user interaction via the keyboard and mouse.
Processor-bound processes spend much of their time executing code. Thet tend to run until they are preempted because they do not block on I/O requests very often. A scheduler policy for processor-bound processes tends to run such processes less frequently but for longer durations.
Examples of processor-bound processes include: a program executing an infinite loop, ssh-keygen, MATLAB.

I/O-bound processes do not need longer timeslices (although they do like to run often)
Processor-bound processes crave long timeslices (to keep their caches hot).

Favoring I/O-bound over processor-bound
Linux, aiming to provide good interactive response and desktop performance, optimizes for process response (low latency), thus favoring I/O-bound processes over processor-bound processes. This is done in a creative manner that does not neglect processor-bound processes.

Timeslice on Linux
Linux's CFS scheduler does not directly assign timeslices to processes, but assigns processes a proportion of the processor. The amount of processor time that a process receives is a function of the load of the system.



